Title:      The Challenge of Art
Author:     Christopher T. Haley
Email:      christopherthaley@gmail.com
Date:       September 17, 2011
Language:   english
XHTML XSLT: xhtml-poetry-support.xslt

Talk to many a contemporary artist --- especially an aspiring artist
--- read a review, listen to some professor in a MFA program, and
you'll quickly get the idea that the point of art is somehow "to
challenge people." About what? Apparently anything goes. I go to the
theater, and someone is challenging my views on race or gender, in the
galleries someone is challenging my views on religion, and God knows
what they're trying to challenge in the symphony halls --- perhaps
just must my patience?

Now, don't misunderstand me: I have the highest regard for art, and
for artists as well...when they are good. But it is an objective fact
(outside of academia and the art world) that there is not a lot of
good art today. And I submit to you that the dearth of good art in our
culture has something to do with this bizarre notion of challenging.

I don't have space here to get into a lengthy discussion on the
history of the role of the artist vis-a-vis the audience, James Joyce,
Schoenberg, and all that. But it will suffice to recount a conversation
I was fortunate to have recently with a young, talented, and sincere
Christian playwright. In discussing her new project --- about which I
am personally excited --- I revealed my lack of sophistication by
asking the very unartistic question: "What's the point?" Of course,
she was ready with an answer: to challenge x, y, and z. But when I
asked her why on earth I would pay good money to go and have my views
challenged by a playwright --- well, she hadn't thought of that. And
people wonder why the arts are suffering! The art schools teach the
students to challenge the audience; but no one has taught the audience
to appreciate it. Many critics even decry this fact, blaming the poor
state of the arts in our country on an audience that just doesn't "get
it" --- whatever "it" is. And indeed, we do not get it. We do not want
to get it.

The notion that the artist's duty is to challenge the audience is
offensive to the audience. It is arrogant and condescending. Learning
how to paint, sculpt, write, or compose, does not make one a moral
authority on art or anything else. There is no moral value in being
transgressive for the sake of transgressiveness. And there is no merit
in challenging people just for the sake of a challenge. The old
"devil's argument" is, after all, a very poor argument.

It is noteworthy that this aim of the contemporary artist is absent
from most great art. Whatever the point of a great works of art, it
certainly is not to challenge people. Of course, no one will dispute
that art does challenge people: the moral difficulties in Shakespeare
and Aeschylus are challenging, Hardy's war poems are challenging,
GÃ³recki's _Third Symphony_ is challenging; any great work of art demands
an appropriately great response, and that is always challenging. But
the real challenge of art is not just some point of argument --- there
are no shortages of those; and I don't need art for that --- the real
challenge of art is something immeasurably greater. The challenge of
art is beauty. And the challenge of beauty is truth. Truth is
challenging. But it is also inviting. It is also glorious and
liberating. Truth is wondrous, not scandalous.

When trying to figure out what the real point of art is, I find it
always a good idea to consult the poetry section before the philosophy
section. Did Homer challenge? Did Pindar? Dante? Milton? They are all
challenging, to be sure. But one would be a fool to say that the
point, the telos, of any great art or artist is primarily to
challenge. What, after all, is the challenge in Mozart or Bach?

So what is the point of art, then, if not to challenge? Rilke
(remember to consult the poets before the theorists) gives one of the
finest answers; in an inscription to a book of poems, he writes:

    [poetry]
    Oh speak, poet, what do you do?  
                            - I praise.
    
    But the monstrosities and the murderous days,  
    how do you endure them, how do you take them?  
                            - I praise.
    
    But the anonymous, the nameless grays,  
    how, poet, do you still invoke them?  
                            - I praise.
    
    What right have you, in all displays,  
    in very mask, to be genuine?  
                            - I praise.
    
    And that the stillness and the turbulent sprays  
    know you like star and storm?  
                            :  - because I praise.

Praise. Celebration. Despite any self-satisfaction, any arrogance, and
rebuke or condemnation, you find always in great art something to
celebrate! Art is about celebration --- not desecration. And it is
just this mistake that misleads so many of today's would-be
artists. Rilke is not unaware of the moral failures of his culture; he
is not blind to the Great War around him. Rilke, and every other great
artist, had to confront the same sorts of tragedies, hypocrisies, and
injustices that today's artists confront. But there is a world of
difference between the way great artists and today's artists respond
to these problems. The artists who endure do so because they see
beyond the problems they face, they look to what is eternal, realizing
that the evils of today are here but for today. Today's artists would
rather hold up --- almost celebrate --- the evils. Take, for example,
one of our finest playwrights, whom I generally admire both as a
playwright and a person: Stephen Adly Guirgis. In his plays _In Arabia
We'd All Be Kings_ and _Our Lady of 121st St._, he gives us a gruesome,
heart-wrenching picture of the underbelly of our society, of the often
(willfully) unseen results of corporate and political malfeasance, of
drugs, of hope and lost hope, of dignity shrouded in darkness; and he
does this with great empathy and humanity. But he stops there. There
is no solution. There is nothing to be praised. He gives this hell to
the audience, and we are supposed to do something about it --- that is
the challenge. The difference is that in great art, when Dante gives
us Hell, he also leads us through Purgatory and into Paradise. It is
precisely this which is lacking in art today. Our artists are content
to give us hell. That is their challenge.

What we find in truly great art, however, is not the challenge of
hell, but a glimpse of heaven. The artist does not come with demands
and accusations, but comes offering praise, delight, beauty, hope,
truth! Perhaps it is because our artists lack these very qualities
that they do not offer them? Or perhaps they have merely been taught
poorly? Whatever the cause, it seems to me that the solution is the
same. The artist's vocation --- like all vocations --- must be
understood as a call to love and humility. This should be at the
forefront of the artist's mind: love your audience as yourself.

This is especially true for the Christian artist. When I talk with
Christian artists, I always ask: "Where are the beatitudes in your
art?" Now that is a challenge. Christ is always the real challenge. We
--- artists and audience --- are called to serve, to be last, to carry
a cross for our neighbor. We are not called to challenge or accuse,
but to love --- that is the challenge! And art will only regain its
proper and necessary place in our culture when artists begin to meet
that challenge, when they no longer see themselves as judges, but as
servants.

But that will not happen unless we, the audience, also do our part: we
must also serve the artists. We must support good art when it is
found, and we must cultivate in our schools and communities the sort
of environment in which great art can flourish. Beauty is relational;
and great art is a two-way street. So perhaps the challenge of art
belongs to all of us.
